Add support for partial success in an OTLP export response (#2636)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/protocol/otlp.md

`ExportMetricsServiceResponse` for metrics and
`ExportLogsServiceResponse` for logs).

The server SHOULD respond with success no sooner than after successfully
decoding and validating the request.

The server MUST leave the `partial_success` field unset
in case of a successful response.

##### Partial Success

If the request is only partially accepted
(i.e. when the server accepts only parts of the data and rejects the rest), the
server response MUST be a Protobuf-encoded
[Export<signal>ServiceResponse](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto)
message (`ExportTraceServiceResponse` for traces,
`ExportMetricsServiceResponse` for metrics and
`ExportLogsServiceResponse` for logs).

Additionally, the server MUST initialize the `partial_success` field
(`ExportTracePartialSuccess` message for traces,
`ExportMetricsPartialSuccess` message for metrics and
`ExportLogsPartialSuccess` message for logs), and it MUST set the respective
`accepted_spans`, `accepted_data_points` or `accepted_log_records` field with
the number of spans/data points/log records it accepted. In case the server
rejected everything, the `accepted_<signal>` field MUST be set to `0`.

> The server MAY populate the `error_message` field with a human-readable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server SHOULD populate the `error_message` field with a human-readable
```

#### OTLP/gRPC Response

The response MUST be the appropriate serialized Protobuf message (see below for
the specific message to use in the [Success](#success),
[Partial Success](#partial-success) and [Failure](#failures) cases).

##### Success

> The success response indicates telemetry data is successfully processed by the

Reviewer 2: "processed" seems very vague. I think producers care the most about the chain of custody, i.e. that the data was handed over to the server who is now responsible for this data, subject to its SLOs (including SLOs for data loss).

If we phrase it in terms of accepting responsibility, then the next paragraph about "processing at a later point" becomes irrelevant.

Author: Yeah now that you mentioned I think I agree. I will try to rephrase it.

server.

The success response may also be used when telemetry data processing is done
at a later point. In such cases, the server may want to return
immediately to ensure low-latency communication with clients.

If the server receives an empty request (a request that does not carry
any telemetry data) the server SHOULD respond with success.

On success, the server response MUST be a Protobuf-encoded

> [Export*ServiceResponse](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Export<signal>ServiceResponse](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto)
```

Author: Fixed in [57734b1](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2636/commits/57734b10340b19168700805363aa3d7bdeeae72a)

message (`ExportTraceServiceResponse` for traces,
`ExportMetricsServiceResponse` for metrics and
`ExportLogsServiceResponse` for logs).

> The server SHOULD respond with success no sooner than after successfully

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The server SHOULD respond with success only after successfully
```
(remove double negative)

Author: Doesn't this change the meaning a bit? Before it was implied that the server could respond with success in two moments:
1. after validating
2. after validating and processing. 

But not sooner than `1`. With the change, now one could interpret that as soon as the server validates the message, it needs to respond.

Reviewer: Isn't this requirement superfluous? How can the server respond at all without decoding and validating the request? I think this is already implied by the fact that the server needs to respond with success/partial/failure and constructing such response does not seem to be possible unless decoding and validation is done.

Author: Less is more, so I'm in favor of removing it. I just didn't because it was already there but I agree :)

Author: Removed in [d9482df](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2636/commits/d9482df28dddc4d83ae10429a2e288d40bfc7788)

decoding and validating the request.

The server MUST leave the `partial_success` field unset
in case of a successful response.

##### Partial Success

If the processing of the request is partially successful
(i.e. when the server accepts only parts of the data and rejects the rest), the
server response MUST be a Protobuf-encoded

> [Export*ServiceResponse](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Export<signal>ServiceResponse](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto)
```

Author: Fixed in [57734b1](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/2636/commits/57734b10340b19168700805363aa3d7bdeeae72a)

message (`ExportTraceServiceResponse` for traces,
`ExportMetricsServiceResponse` for metrics and
`ExportLogsServiceResponse` for logs).

Additionally, the server MUST initialize the `partial_success` field
(`ExportTracePartialSuccess` message for traces,
`ExportMetricsPartialSuccess` message for metrics and
`ExportLogsPartialSuccess` message for logs), and it MUST set the respective
`accepted_spans`, `accepted_data_points` or `accepted_log_records` field with
the number of spans/data points/log records it accepted. In case the server

> rejected everything, the `accepted_*` field MUST be set to `0`.

Reviewer 2: if it rejected everything, how is it a "success"?

#### OTLP/HTTP Response

> Response body MUST be the appropriate serialized Protobuf message (see below for

Author: There are a few nuances, for ex, for HTTP, we indicate which `Content-Type` should be used for the response, compression, which status code to return. Such things don't apply to gRPC.. so I was not sure what makes sense. Having a combined section and doing "If HTTP, return xyz header" doesn't sound good. Another point is if someone is implementing a gRPC server, they don't don't have to read the HTTP stuff and vice-versa. 

I'm open to improve it, but I'm not sure to what extent. It could also be a follow up to make the review easier? Open to suggestions :)

delivery, which may result in duplicate data on the server side. This is a
deliberate choice and is considered to be the right tradeoff for telemetry data.

#### Partial Success Retry

> Each server has its particularities and its way of treating data. There

Reviewer 3: This seems to be a bit verbose.  I think we should specify more explicitly here:

1. Clients, by default, will not attempt automatic retry.
2. Servers should leverage partial success when they fully understand that resending the *exact same* bundle of telemetry would lead to another error (preventing retry loops).

The rest of this commentary is nice for WHY, but the WHAT should be called out explicitly.
